# Modules

## Beginning of Post-Modern

### 9. Ch. 18: Barth, Bultmann, end of western civilization

#### Old Presentations

##### 

##### as above

##### ch. 18, Barth, Bonhoeffer

##### into 20th c.

#### S21

##### Presentations

* The end of western Christendom
	* epigraph: Peter Berger re. Nazi's
	* Barth & Bonhoeffer
	* American developments
	* Bultmann & Existentialism
		* Heidegger
	* Roman Catholic Theology to Vatican II
* Representative figures
	* Karl Barth
	* Albert Schweitzer
	* Bohoeffer
	* Niebuhr
	* Bultmann

### 10. Ch. 19: Current scene

#### Old Presentations

##### 

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Tentative view: current scene
	* Hope & eschatology
	* Theology and recent philosophers
	* Theology and the secular
	* Liberation theology
	* Theology and the religions
* Figures
	* Tillich
	* 2nd Vatican Council

## Age of Expansion

### 6. Ch. 15: Reason and Enthusiasm

#### Old presentations

##### Rationality

##### Age of reason

##### 

##### 

##### Enlightenment to city on a hill

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Reason and Enthusiasm (Enlightenment)
	* Voltaire
	* Religion of reason
		* Cambridge Platonists (Isaac Newton) p. 205
		* John Locke (most influential English philosopher of his day *The reasonableness of Christianity* (Locke)
	* Enthusiasm: Pietists and Methodists
		* German pietism (210)
		* Wesley "denied baptismal regeneration" providing **only** an outward sign (211)
		* real change occurs when we experience &#x2026; **born again**
	* John Wesley
	* John Locke
* End of the Age of Reason
	* David Hume, "asking embarrassing questions about scientific method" (213), **question about what we can know** &#x2013; scepticism
	* Rousseau, Lessing &#x2026; Christian, Jews, Muslims should all follow God and humanity in own ways (215)
	* Kant "sought religion independent of historical facts about Jesus" &#x2013; cf. also his morality &#x2026; "Kant believed in God and grace, but not in most of Christian theology."
	* I. Kant

### 7. Ch. 16: City on a Hill (America)

#### Old presentations

##### 

##### bare bones, Covenant, Great awakening

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Key figures
	* John Winthrop
	* Jonathan Edwards
	* Great Awakening
	* Grimke
* Overview themes of Church in America
	* the **idea** of **denomination** really developed in the US
	* bewildering variety of developments in US (219)
	* ### New England's covenant with God (219)
	* ### Rational religion in the US (224)
	* ### Revivals on the frontier (225)
	* ### Romanticism in America (228)
	* ### Slavery and black religion (230)

### 8. Ch. 17: Hegel and claims of history

#### Old presentations

##### Romantic era

##### ch. 17, trust in history

##### 

##### 

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Overview: The claims of history (233)
	* generally a new awareness of **history**
	* 2 Romantics
		* Schleiermacher in Germany and Coleridge in England appealed to **romanticism** "to defend Christianity against the claims of natural religion"
	* Hegelians and anti-Hegelians
		* Hegel (and others) began to wonder how one could make absolute truth claim given that societies saw the world differently
		* David F. Strauss (1835) published *Life of Jesus* &#x2013; providing rational explanation for miracles
		* Ludwig Feuerbach (Hegel, he said, had it backwards) "human being invent the idea of God"
		* Søren Kierkegaard, teaching Christianity to comfortable people who already convinced that they were Christians
			* Leap of Faith and Abraham's "religious stage" (240)
	* Roman Catholic and English Theology
		* Pius IX created modern papacy "in spite of himself" *ex cathedra* and dogmas
		* Leo XIII and social justice (cf. also condemnation of **modernism**) (242)
		* Newman and John Keble cf. reform of authority in church
			* conviction first that C of E preserved the most ancient traditions, then his study concluded that there was always a development of doctrine
			* tore the Oxford movement apart by becoming Roman Catholic
			* Oxford movement became "high church" cf. Frederidck Denison Maurice rejecting both high and low church approach
		* implications of **Darwin** (245)
	* Liberal theology and its critics
		* German scholars of "history of religions school" were discovering the complexity of the history of Christianity"
		* Harnack
* Hegel and anti-Hegelians
	* Schleiermacher?
	* 1st Vatican Council

## Introductions

### 1. Introductions

#### S21

##### Discussion thread

* Discussion thread "What are you looking for from this class? What should we know about you and your background in order to have fruitful discussions this semester?

##### Presentations s21

* Unpacking the title of the class: Modern + Christian + Thought
	* History
	* Knowledge
	* Preliminary
		* what do we know?
		* what is history, change
		* what is "modern"
		* what is "Christian thought"
	* Prelude
		* The long view of western thought and civilization
	* Definitions
		* "Modern" is Reformation forward. It didn't happen in a vacuum
	* Some limitations and warnings (these then are things to clarify initially)
		* history of Christian theology not genral hx, intellectual hx, etc.
		* "theology" = "systematic reflection on one's faith"
		* need to select and leave things out
* video stuff to provide perspective
	* out of a big list of century timeline, what important?
	* What is left out?
	* Scale of the universe video
	* String exercise
	* [[history of religions in 2.5 minutes video](](https://youtu.be/AvFl6UBZLv4))
	* [[spread of Christianity in 2 min](](https://youtu.be/BJ0dZhHccfU))
	* history of Judaism in 5 min.
	* [[all of human history in 6 min](](https://youtu.be/n0I3ap335hM))
	* [[History of Christianity in 5 min](](https://youtu.be/3e9ipBX2gR0))
	* [[5 major world religions](](https://youtu.be/m6dCxo7t_aE))
* Prefatory re. Placher
	* his attention to problems of biblical interpretation
	* insistence on theological interpretation of Scripture (helping to bridge divides in Christendom)
	* "Placher's postliberal approach (to theology and experience) way to critically appropriate the best of postmodern thought while avoiding &#x2026;" (xiv)
	* postliberal (Yale school) shares conviction that modern period is over and must be got past
		* thus not "foundational" based on universal claims of rationality
		* he followed Lindbeck and Frei
		* n.b. the "deadends" of typical approach to truth in biblical interpreation (xv)
		* Barth became in 70's great postliberal inspiration
		* major emphasis on " **conversation**" (narrativity)
	* Pivot of history: God before and after modernity (xviii)
	* History, CHristology and suffering
* Introduction
	* Some limitations and warnings (these then are things to clarify initially)
		* history of Christian theology not genral hx, intellectual hx, etc.
		* "theology" = "systematic reflection on one's faith"
		* need to select and leave things out

### 2. Background

#### old presentations

##### review basic themes, Reformation vocab

##### 5 themes, philosophical issues

##### introductory

#### S21

##### Resources

* Various media
	* [[PBS]( Luther](https://youtu.be/fp77mcJKsIk))
	* [[Short overview Reformation](](https://youtu.be/IATyzSAjC1w))
	* [[Rick Steves Reformation](](https://youtu.be/CXK9NNp1yk4))
	* [[The Council of Trent in 5 and a half minutes](](https://youtu.be/qwT35DULwLg))
	* Crash courses
		* [[Crash course Reformation](](https://youtu.be/0eO0pPrGi6o))
		* [[Catholic Counter-Reformation: Crash Course European History #9](](https://youtu.be/xy_M4pDjafo))
		* [[Reformation consequences]( crash course esp. the political consequences #7](https://youtu.be/PbBDP1Elbbg))
		* [[The Age of Exploration: Crash Course European History #4](](https://youtu.be/wOclF9eP5uM))
		* [[Expansion and Consequences: Crash Course European History #5](](https://youtu.be/AcphphFoijY))
		* [[Locke, Berkeley, & Empiricism: Crash Course Philosophy #6](](https://youtu.be/5C-s4JrymKM))
	* Prezi
		* Prezi
			* Table of Contents # Prezi's of note - Martin Luther and the Reformation: overview - ditto with a cute skit by authors on Youtube, vocabulary including: - nepotism: handing out positions to family members - pluralism: illegally hold more than one clergy position - ignorance: esp. of clergy - indulgences - absenteeism: clergy did not live in their diocese or parishes - worldliness: clergy got drunk, lead armies, fathered children, gambled etc. - Several about Luther, Wycliffe, Calvin &#x2013; they are wordy but informative - Prezi on 14th c. European painting: - 14th c. -
			* Prezi of art of the 14th century. illustrating how far away that. Was from modern times.
			* Prezi on Luther and Wyclef.
* Crash course
	* Crash Course European History Preview
	* Medieval Europe: Crash Course European History #1
	* Florence and the Renaissance: Crash Course European History #2
	* The Northern Renaissance: Crash Course European History #3
	* The Age of Exploration: Crash Course European History #4
	* Expansion and Consequences: Crash Course European History #5
	* The Protestant Reformation: Crash Course European History #6
	* Reformation and Consequences: Crash Course European History #7
	* Commerce, Agriculture, and Slavery: Crash Course European History #8
	* Catholic Counter-Reformation: Crash Course European History #9
	* Witchcraft: Crash Course European History #10
	* The 17th Century Crisis: Crash Course European History #11
	* Scientific Revolution: Crash Course European History #12
	* Absolute Monarchy: Crash Course European History #13
	* English Civil War: Crash Course European History #14
	* Dutch Golden Age: Crash Course European History #15
	* Eastern Europe Consolidates: Crash Course European History #16
	* The Rise of Russia and Prussia: Crash Course European History #17
	* The Enlightenment: Crash Course European History #18
	* Enlightened Monarchs: Crash Course European History #19
	* 18th Century Warfare: Crash Course European History #20
	* The French Revolution: Crash Course European History #21
	* Napoleon Bonaparte: Crash Course European History #22
	* The Congress of Vienna: Crash Course European History #23
	* The Industrial Revolution: Crash Course European History #24
	* Reform and Revolution 1815-1848: Crash Course European History #25
	* Revolutions of 1848: Crash Course European History #26
	* Italian and German Unification: Crash Course European History #27
	* Expansion and Resistance: Crash Course European History #28
	* Migration: Crash Course European History #29
	* Modern Life: Crash Course European History #30
	* Modern Thought and Culture in 1900: Crash Course European History #31
	* The Roads to World War I: Crash Course European History #32
	* World War I Battlefields: Crash Course European History #33
	* WWI's Civilians, the Homefront, and an Uneasy Peace: Crash Course European History #34
	* Russian Revolution and Civil War: Crash Course European History #35
	* Post-World War I Recovery: Crash Course European History #36
	* Economic Depression and Dictators: Crash Course European History #37
	* World War II: Crash Course European History #38
	* World War II Civilians and Soldiers: Crash Course European History #39
	* The Holocaust,Genocides, and Mass Murder of WWII: Crash Course European History #40
	* Post-War Rebuilding and the Cold War: Crash Course European History #41
	* Post-World War II Recovery: Crash Course European History #42
	* Decolonization: Crash Course European History #43
	* Revolutions in Science and Tech: Crash Course European History #44
	* Protests East and West: Crash Course European History #45
	* The Soviet Bloc Unwinds: Crash Course European History #46
	* The Fall of Communism: Crash Course European History #47
	* Europe in the Global Age: Crash Course European History #48
	* 21st Century Challenges: Crash Course European History #49
	* What History Was, Is, and Will Be: Crash Course European History #50
	* Medieval Europe: Crash Course European Histo
	* The Protestant Reformation: Crash Course European History
	* Indus Valley Civilization: Crash Course World History #2
	* Luther and the Protestant Reformation: Crash Course World History #218
* texts: sites for resources
	* 
	* 
	* 
	* 

##### Presentations s21

* Philosophical Questions:
	* what is "nominalism"
	* shift from God to Human?
	* What going on in period? plague, decimation, *memento mori*
	* Nominalism vs. Realism (philosophical concepts)
		* the really real vs. knowing the individual rather than the universal
		* cf. John Duns Scotus
		* William of Ockham: showing reason's limitations
		* Ockham's "razor"
* 5 continuums / themes playing out over the centuries
	* 1. Humanity and Divinity of Christ
	* 2. Reason and revelation
	* 3. Works and Grace
	* 4. Spirit and Structure
	* 5. Church and State
	* path to salvation
		* reflecting the particular, we contrivute to the salvicfic effect (Pelagian?)
		* later Martin Luther was Augustinian trained as nominalist
		* Meister Eckhart (God's spark within us) n.b. 14th c. **mystical** traditions (*tradition where metaphysics is more controversial than sex*)
* Cultural eras
	* Renaissance
	* Development of National identities (including languages)
	* Printing Press
	* Development of European music
	* Science and Technology
	* Discovery of Americas
	* Rise of Capitalism
	* Enlightenment
	* Romantic / Baroque
	* Wars
	* Liberation: Women, Slavery, Indigenous Peoples ...
* councils and rebels
	* Avignon etc. competing popes
	* church corruption
	* burning of John Hus (1410)
	* John Wycliffe in England (foundation for protest against church authority)
	* Nicholas of Cusa defended pope's authority from a mystic point of view
	* toward hunmanism and simple piety
		* rise of Renaissance (art not theology lay at the heart of the movement)
		* rise of *Modern Devotion*
		* "nominalism and raised basic questions about hte nature of the order we see around us."

## Beginning the Reformation

### 3. Ch. 12: Luther & Reformation

#### old presentations

##### Radical Reformation

##### repeat + quote Erasmus

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Reformation Overview
	* Key themes of Reformation
		* Sola Fides
		* #### 12 Faith alone, scripture alone
		* Sola Gratia
		* Sola Scriptura
		* Authority
		* Free will and Predestination
		* Notes:
			* [https://wp.cune.edu/twokingdoms2/files/2016/12/Key-Reformation-Themes-a-Summary.pdf](https://wp.cune.edu/twokingdoms2/files/2016/12/Key-Reformation-Themes-a-Summary.pdf)
			* Law & Gospel
			* [https://schoolworkhelper.net/key-changes-of-renaissance-and-reformation/](https://schoolworkhelper.net/key-changes-of-renaissance-and-reformation/)
	*  Questions and issues
		* new worlds, discovery
		* cf. Michener pp on 1500's
		* "reform" implies what?
* Luther
	* 1500's
		* epigram re. we are "becoming"
		* Luther (in all his complexity) and his struggles
	* Luther against the world
		* near contemporary = Columbus discovering new world
		* as **nominalist** he taught that with help of grace we earn our own salvation
		* **Purgatory** as a concept and related **indulgences**
		* 95 theses
		* L. gained support from humanists (Renaissance) &#x2013; cf. Erasmus
		* Erasmus sought to clear away corruption and restore simple ethical Christianity
		* L.'s conservatism on social issues
		* Thomas Munzer (trust in Spirit) conflict with L. &#x2013; he saw the end times and 2nd Coming
	* Zurich and Zwingli
		* Z. shared L.'s desire for reform, but different emphasis
		* Z. started with absolute authority of scripture
		* Z. partly allied with Erasmus in desire to cleanse the church
		* Z. and L. in different political environments (princedom vs. democracy)
		* infant baptism?
		* eucharist *consubstantiation* vs. *symbolize*
	* Lutheran developments
		* cf. ch. 14 for Zwinglian developments
		* justification by faith (though we remain sinners) cf. P. Wismer's analogy re. looking at the board of writing but "seeing" a clean board
		* continued debate about the role of grace and our participation with it
		* increasingly "faith" meant an "assent to a set of propositions." p. 167
	* radical reformation
		* an "odd collection of pacificsts and violent revolutionaries, eccentric individualists and tightly knit communities, biblical literalists and those who followed the inner voice of the Spirit"
		* anabaptists ("rebaptizers")

### 4. Ch. 13: Counter Reformation

#### 13 Catholic Reformation

##### questions and focus

* read Erasmus
* "authority" and scripture, tradition
* Read Don Quixote? What have to do with Christian thought? Knighthood? Chivalry? "Good citizen"
* read Pascal: wager, end of logic?
* what is "pietism"

##### epithoughts

* Erasmius yielded to Loyola (desire for reform)
* response of Church "a more militant, less tolerant church"

##### Council of Trent

* p. 173 notion of "justification" which many thought as a kind of property people have or don't, &#x2013; L. "no righteousness of our own but only share in Christ's righteousness"
* Trent set forth doctrinal statements on Scripture and tradition, original sin, justification, and the sacraments that have provided the basis of Catholic theology ever since," laid foundation for reform
	* Scripture and tradition equally
	* L. had said original sin destroyed will, Catholics sought compromise
	* Justification as a "process" not instantaneous as L. thought
	* Sacraments and reform: 7 sacraments, transubstantiation, sacrifice on altar repeated, purgatory and indulgences (but warned re. abuse)

##### Jesuits and mystics

* Don Quixote and Loyola (Knight for Christ)
* S.J. sending missionaries world wide, adapting to customs of people they met
* Carmelites (John and Teresa)

##### Continuing debates

* Jesuits at center of response to Protestantism
* "Aquinas had taught that we talk about God "analogically"
* Port Royal Jansenists &#x2013; rigorous piety and trust in grace as opposed to Jesuits whom they saw as "Pelagian"
* Pascal: genius of age &#x2026; conversion "Fire, God of Abraham &#x2026;" trust in grace while being well trained in reason as mathematician
* Pascal defense of Christianity, but ultimately Pope ruled against Jansenist radical trust in grace (not own will)
* Fenelon, "Quietism", Mme. Guyon == claiming that usual rules don't apply because of special relationship with God

#### old presentations

##### 

##### Counter-reform, Calvin

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Trent
* Ignatius
* Teresa of Avila

### 5. Ch. 14: Calvin et al

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Developing themes of Modern world
	* Individualization
	* Empirical reason, Scientific Method
	* Exploration of world of diverse cultures
	* Important Developments of the Modern period
		* Exploration of the world: growing awareness of diversity in the world
		* Importance of Americas
			* Suddenly expanded natural resources
			* distance from Europe
			* "Independence"
		* Science & technology
			* exponential growth of "knowledge"[^2]
				* [^2]: cf. Mary Pat's visuals
		* Wars becoming more and more destructive, even as hope was projected
		* End of 19th c. "everything is known, just mopping up"[^1]
			* [^1]: cf. in Joplin [Which 19th century physicist famously said that all that remained to be done in physics was compute effects to another decimal place? - Quora](:/de8d5070d1b44c9e8cbee67c42a4925a)
		* Exploitation of the earth's ecosystems
* Calvin
	* Old presentations
		* 
		* Calvinism
	* Knox and Arminius
		* Scotland corrupt church 193, thus as in France political conditions drove Calvin's followers
		* p. 194 table of **5 basic principles of Calvinist orthodoxy**
* epithoughts on Calvinism
	* "Calvinist in polity"
	* Knox and Calvin and the "reformed" tradition
	* Calvin retreating from France to Geneva
	* reading Calvin elicits not an emotional response but a cumulative one from the systematic presentation p 188
	* response to (free) grace is a **reformed** life (thus the name)
	* in contrast to Luther's distinction between law and gospel, Calvin thought we stood in the same convenant as Abraham (189)
	* "Reflections on how we come to be saved led to the doctrine of predestination (189 ff.)
	* Memoirs of confessed killer
	* theology of sacraments: cf. **Martin Bucer** (large influence)
		* sought position between Luther and Zwingli
	* questions/focus
		* "reform" as in "reformed life"
		* organizing society, community
		* what is community?
		* 39 articles
		* "Puritans"
* From Puritans to Quakers
	* cf. because of impact on US
	* Reformation in England
		* Thomas Cranmer
		* 39 articles
	* "purifying" church, worked hard and saved their money
		* Oliver Cromwell
	* Anglicans who took into account of Puritans: John Donne, William Laud, Lancelot Andrewes, Richard Hooker
		* Richard Hooker
	* Quakerseveal~wid# Modules

## Beginning of Post-Modern

### 9. Ch. 18: Barth, Bultmann, end of western civilization

#### Old Presentations

##### 

##### as above

##### ch. 18, Barth, Bonhoeffer

##### into 20th c.

#### S21

##### Presentations

* The end of western Christendom
	* epigraph: Peter Berger re. Nazi's
	* Barth & Bonhoeffer
	* American developments
	* Bultmann & Existentialism
		* Heidegger
	* Roman Catholic Theology to Vatican II
* Representative figures
	* Karl Barth
	* Albert Schweitzer
	* Bohoeffer
	* Niebuhr
	* Bultmann

### 10. Ch. 19: Current scene

#### Old Presentations

##### 

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Tentative view: current scene
	* Hope & eschatology
	* Theology and recent philosophers
	* Theology and the secular
	* Liberation theology
	* Theology and the religions
* Figures
	* Tillich
	* 2nd Vatican Council

## Age of Expansion

### 6. Ch. 15: Reason and Enthusiasm

#### Old presentations

##### Rationality

##### Age of reason

##### 

##### 

##### Enlightenment to city on a hill

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Reason and Enthusiasm (Enlightenment)
	* Voltaire
	* Religion of reason
		* Cambridge Platonists (Isaac Newton) p. 205
		* John Locke (most influential English philosopher of his day *The reasonableness of Christianity* (Locke)
	* Enthusiasm: Pietists and Methodists
		* German pietism (210)
		* Wesley "denied baptismal regeneration" providing **only** an outward sign (211)
		* real change occurs when we experience &#x2026; **born again**
	* John Wesley
	* John Locke
* End of the Age of Reason
	* David Hume, "asking embarrassing questions about scientific method" (213), **question about what we can know** &#x2013; scepticism
	* Rousseau, Lessing &#x2026; Christian, Jews, Muslims should all follow God and humanity in own ways (215)
	* Kant "sought religion independent of historical facts about Jesus" &#x2013; cf. also his morality &#x2026; "Kant believed in God and grace, but not in most of Christian theology."
	* I. Kant

### 7. Ch. 16: City on a Hill (America)

#### Old presentations

##### 

##### bare bones, Covenant, Great awakening

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Key figures
	* John Winthrop
	* Jonathan Edwards
	* Great Awakening
	* Grimke
* Overview themes of Church in America
	* the **idea** of **denomination** really developed in the US
	* bewildering variety of developments in US (219)
	* ### New England's covenant with God (219)
	* ### Rational religion in the US (224)
	* ### Revivals on the frontier (225)
	* ### Romanticism in America (228)
	* ### Slavery and black religion (230)

### 8. Ch. 17: Hegel and claims of history

#### Old presentations

##### Romantic era

##### ch. 17, trust in history

##### 

##### 

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Overview: The claims of history (233)
	* generally a new awareness of **history**
	* 2 Romantics
		* Schleiermacher in Germany and Coleridge in England appealed to **romanticism** "to defend Christianity against the claims of natural religion"
	* Hegelians and anti-Hegelians
		* Hegel (and others) began to wonder how one could make absolute truth claim given that societies saw the world differently
		* David F. Strauss (1835) published *Life of Jesus* &#x2013; providing rational explanation for miracles
		* Ludwig Feuerbach (Hegel, he said, had it backwards) "human being invent the idea of God"
		* Søren Kierkegaard, teaching Christianity to comfortable people who already convinced that they were Christians
			* Leap of Faith and Abraham's "religious stage" (240)
	* Roman Catholic and English Theology
		* Pius IX created modern papacy "in spite of himself" *ex cathedra* and dogmas
		* Leo XIII and social justice (cf. also condemnation of **modernism**) (242)
		* Newman and John Keble cf. reform of authority in church
			* conviction first that C of E preserved the most ancient traditions, then his study concluded that there was always a development of doctrine
			* tore the Oxford movement apart by becoming Roman Catholic
			* Oxford movement became "high church" cf. Frederidck Denison Maurice rejecting both high and low church approach
		* implications of **Darwin** (245)
	* Liberal theology and its critics
		* German scholars of "history of religions school" were discovering the complexity of the history of Christianity"
		* Harnack
* Hegel and anti-Hegelians
	* Schleiermacher?
	* 1st Vatican Council

## Introductions

### 1. Introductions

#### S21

##### Discussion thread

* Discussion thread "What are you looking for from this class? What should we know about you and your background in order to have fruitful discussions this semester?

##### Presentations s21

* Unpacking the title of the class: Modern + Christian + Thought
	* History
	* Knowledge
	* Preliminary
		* what do we know?
		* what is history, change
		* what is "modern"
		* what is "Christian thought"
	* Prelude
		* The long view of western thought and civilization
	* Definitions
		* "Modern" is Reformation forward. It didn't happen in a vacuum
	* Some limitations and warnings (these then are things to clarify initially)
		* history of Christian theology not genral hx, intellectual hx, etc.
		* "theology" = "systematic reflection on one's faith"
		* need to select and leave things out
* video stuff to provide perspective
	* out of a big list of century timeline, what important?
	* What is left out?
	* Scale of the universe video
	* String exercise
	* [[history of religions in 2.5 minutes video](](https://youtu.be/AvFl6UBZLv4))
	* [[spread of Christianity in 2 min](](https://youtu.be/BJ0dZhHccfU))
	* history of Judaism in 5 min.
	* [[all of human history in 6 min](](https://youtu.be/n0I3ap335hM))
	* [[History of Christianity in 5 min](](https://youtu.be/3e9ipBX2gR0))
	* [[5 major world religions](](https://youtu.be/m6dCxo7t_aE))
* Prefatory re. Placher
	* his attention to problems of biblical interpretation
	* insistence on theological interpretation of Scripture (helping to bridge divides in Christendom)
	* "Placher's postliberal approach (to theology and experience) way to critically appropriate the best of postmodern thought while avoiding &#x2026;" (xiv)
	* postliberal (Yale school) shares conviction that modern period is over and must be got past
		* thus not "foundational" based on universal claims of rationality
		* he followed Lindbeck and Frei
		* n.b. the "deadends" of typical approach to truth in biblical interpreation (xv)
		* Barth became in 70's great postliberal inspiration
		* major emphasis on " **conversation**" (narrativity)
	* Pivot of history: God before and after modernity (xviii)
	* History, CHristology and suffering
* Introduction
	* Some limitations and warnings (these then are things to clarify initially)
		* history of Christian theology not genral hx, intellectual hx, etc.
		* "theology" = "systematic reflection on one's faith"
		* need to select and leave things out

### 2. Background

#### old presentations

##### review basic themes, Reformation vocab

##### 5 themes, philosophical issues

##### introductory

#### S21

##### Resources

* Various media
	* [[PBS]( Luther](https://youtu.be/fp77mcJKsIk))
	* [[Short overview Reformation](](https://youtu.be/IATyzSAjC1w))
	* [[Rick Steves Reformation](](https://youtu.be/CXK9NNp1yk4))
	* [[The Council of Trent in 5 and a half minutes](](https://youtu.be/qwT35DULwLg))
	* Crash courses
		* [[Crash course Reformation](](https://youtu.be/0eO0pPrGi6o))
		* [[Catholic Counter-Reformation: Crash Course European History #9](](https://youtu.be/xy_M4pDjafo))
		* [[Reformation consequences]( crash course esp. the political consequences #7](https://youtu.be/PbBDP1Elbbg))
		* [[The Age of Exploration: Crash Course European History #4](](https://youtu.be/wOclF9eP5uM))
		* [[Expansion and Consequences: Crash Course European History #5](](https://youtu.be/AcphphFoijY))
		* [[Locke, Berkeley, & Empiricism: Crash Course Philosophy #6](](https://youtu.be/5C-s4JrymKM))
	* Prezi
		* Prezi
			* Table of Contents # Prezi's of note - Martin Luther and the Reformation: overview - ditto with a cute skit by authors on Youtube, vocabulary including: - nepotism: handing out positions to family members - pluralism: illegally hold more than one clergy position - ignorance: esp. of clergy - indulgences - absenteeism: clergy did not live in their diocese or parishes - worldliness: clergy got drunk, lead armies, fathered children, gambled etc. - Several about Luther, Wycliffe, Calvin &#x2013; they are wordy but informative - Prezi on 14th c. European painting: - 14th c. -
			* Prezi of art of the 14th century. illustrating how far away that. Was from modern times.
			* Prezi on Luther and Wyclef.
* Crash course
	* Crash Course European History Preview
	* Medieval Europe: Crash Course European History #1
	* Florence and the Renaissance: Crash Course European History #2
	* The Northern Renaissance: Crash Course European History #3
	* The Age of Exploration: Crash Course European History #4
	* Expansion and Consequences: Crash Course European History #5
	* The Protestant Reformation: Crash Course European History #6
	* Reformation and Consequences: Crash Course European History #7
	* Commerce, Agriculture, and Slavery: Crash Course European History #8
	* Catholic Counter-Reformation: Crash Course European History #9
	* Witchcraft: Crash Course European History #10
	* The 17th Century Crisis: Crash Course European History #11
	* Scientific Revolution: Crash Course European History #12
	* Absolute Monarchy: Crash Course European History #13
	* English Civil War: Crash Course European History #14
	* Dutch Golden Age: Crash Course European History #15
	* Eastern Europe Consolidates: Crash Course European History #16
	* The Rise of Russia and Prussia: Crash Course European History #17
	* The Enlightenment: Crash Course European History #18
	* Enlightened Monarchs: Crash Course European History #19
	* 18th Century Warfare: Crash Course European History #20
	* The French Revolution: Crash Course European History #21
	* Napoleon Bonaparte: Crash Course European History #22
	* The Congress of Vienna: Crash Course European History #23
	* The Industrial Revolution: Crash Course European History #24
	* Reform and Revolution 1815-1848: Crash Course European History #25
	* Revolutions of 1848: Crash Course European History #26
	* Italian and German Unification: Crash Course European History #27
	* Expansion and Resistance: Crash Course European History #28
	* Migration: Crash Course European History #29
	* Modern Life: Crash Course European History #30
	* Modern Thought and Culture in 1900: Crash Course European History #31
	* The Roads to World War I: Crash Course European History #32
	* World War I Battlefields: Crash Course European History #33
	* WWI's Civilians, the Homefront, and an Uneasy Peace: Crash Course European History #34
	* Russian Revolution and Civil War: Crash Course European History #35
	* Post-World War I Recovery: Crash Course European History #36
	* Economic Depression and Dictators: Crash Course European History #37
	* World War II: Crash Course European History #38
	* World War II Civilians and Soldiers: Crash Course European History #39
	* The Holocaust,Genocides, and Mass Murder of WWII: Crash Course European History #40
	* Post-War Rebuilding and the Cold War: Crash Course European History #41
	* Post-World War II Recovery: Crash Course European History #42
	* Decolonization: Crash Course European History #43
	* Revolutions in Science and Tech: Crash Course European History #44
	* Protests East and West: Crash Course European History #45
	* The Soviet Bloc Unwinds: Crash Course European History #46
	* The Fall of Communism: Crash Course European History #47
	* Europe in the Global Age: Crash Course European History #48
	* 21st Century Challenges: Crash Course European History #49
	* What History Was, Is, and Will Be: Crash Course European History #50
	* Medieval Europe: Crash Course European Histo
	* The Protestant Reformation: Crash Course European History
	* Indus Valley Civilization: Crash Course World History #2
	* Luther and the Protestant Reformation: Crash Course World History #218
* texts: sites for resources
	* 
	* 
	* 
	* 

##### Presentations s21

* Philosophical Questions:
	* what is "nominalism"
	* shift from God to Human?
	* What going on in period? plague, decimation, *memento mori*
	* Nominalism vs. Realism (philosophical concepts)
		* the really real vs. knowing the individual rather than the universal
		* cf. John Duns Scotus
		* William of Ockham: showing reason's limitations
		* Ockham's "razor"
* 5 continuums / themes playing out over the centuries
	* 1. Humanity and Divinity of Christ
	* 2. Reason and revelation
	* 3. Works and Grace
	* 4. Spirit and Structure
	* 5. Church and State
	* path to salvation
		* reflecting the particular, we contrivute to the salvicfic effect (Pelagian?)
		* later Martin Luther was Augustinian trained as nominalist
		* Meister Eckhart (God's spark within us) n.b. 14th c. **mystical** traditions (*tradition where metaphysics is more controversial than sex*)
* Cultural eras
	* Renaissance
	* Development of National identities (including languages)
	* Printing Press
	* Development of European music
	* Science and Technology
	* Discovery of Americas
	* Rise of Capitalism
	* Enlightenment
	* Romantic / Baroque
	* Wars
	* Liberation: Women, Slavery, Indigenous Peoples ...
* councils and rebels
	* Avignon etc. competing popes
	* church corruption
	* burning of John Hus (1410)
	* John Wycliffe in England (foundation for protest against church authority)
	* Nicholas of Cusa defended pope's authority from a mystic point of view
	* toward hunmanism and simple piety
		* rise of Renaissance (art not theology lay at the heart of the movement)
		* rise of *Modern Devotion*
		* "nominalism and raised basic questions about hte nature of the order we see around us."

## Beginning the Reformation

### 3. Ch. 12: Luther & Reformation

#### old presentations

##### Radical Reformation

##### repeat + quote Erasmus

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Reformation Overview
	* Key themes of Reformation
		* Sola Fides
		* #### 12 Faith alone, scripture alone
		* Sola Gratia
		* Sola Scriptura
		* Authority
		* Free will and Predestination
		* Notes:
			* [https://wp.cune.edu/twokingdoms2/files/2016/12/Key-Reformation-Themes-a-Summary.pdf](https://wp.cune.edu/twokingdoms2/files/2016/12/Key-Reformation-Themes-a-Summary.pdf)
			* Law & Gospel
			* [https://schoolworkhelper.net/key-changes-of-renaissance-and-reformation/](https://schoolworkhelper.net/key-changes-of-renaissance-and-reformation/)
	*  Questions and issues
		* new worlds, discovery
		* cf. Michener pp on 1500's
		* "reform" implies what?
* Luther
	* 1500's
		* epigram re. we are "becoming"
		* Luther (in all his complexity) and his struggles
	* Luther against the world
		* near contemporary = Columbus discovering new world
		* as **nominalist** he taught that with help of grace we earn our own salvation
		* **Purgatory** as a concept and related **indulgences**
		* 95 theses
		* L. gained support from humanists (Renaissance) &#x2013; cf. Erasmus
		* Erasmus sought to clear away corruption and restore simple ethical Christianity
		* L.'s conservatism on social issues
		* Thomas Munzer (trust in Spirit) conflict with L. &#x2013; he saw the end times and 2nd Coming
	* Zurich and Zwingli
		* Z. shared L.'s desire for reform, but different emphasis
		* Z. started with absolute authority of scripture
		* Z. partly allied with Erasmus in desire to cleanse the church
		* Z. and L. in different political environments (princedom vs. democracy)
		* infant baptism?
		* eucharist *consubstantiation* vs. *symbolize*
	* Lutheran developments
		* cf. ch. 14 for Zwinglian developments
		* justification by faith (though we remain sinners) cf. P. Wismer's analogy re. looking at the board of writing but "seeing" a clean board
		* continued debate about the role of grace and our participation with it
		* increasingly "faith" meant an "assent to a set of propositions." p. 167
	* radical reformation
		* an "odd collection of pacificsts and violent revolutionaries, eccentric individualists and tightly knit communities, biblical literalists and those who followed the inner voice of the Spirit"
		* anabaptists ("rebaptizers")

### 4. Ch. 13: Counter Reformation

#### 13 Catholic Reformation

##### questions and focus

* read Erasmus
* "authority" and scripture, tradition
* Read Don Quixote? What have to do with Christian thought? Knighthood? Chivalry? "Good citizen"
* read Pascal: wager, end of logic?
* what is "pietism"

##### epithoughts

* Erasmius yielded to Loyola (desire for reform)
* response of Church "a more militant, less tolerant church"

##### Council of Trent

* p. 173 notion of "justification" which many thought as a kind of property people have or don't, &#x2013; L. "no righteousness of our own but only share in Christ's righteousness"
* Trent set forth doctrinal statements on Scripture and tradition, original sin, justification, and the sacraments that have provided the basis of Catholic theology ever since," laid foundation for reform
	* Scripture and tradition equally
	* L. had said original sin destroyed will, Catholics sought compromise
	* Justification as a "process" not instantaneous as L. thought
	* Sacraments and reform: 7 sacraments, transubstantiation, sacrifice on altar repeated, purgatory and indulgences (but warned re. abuse)

##### Jesuits and mystics

* Don Quixote and Loyola (Knight for Christ)
* S.J. sending missionaries world wide, adapting to customs of people they met
* Carmelites (John and Teresa)

##### Continuing debates

* Jesuits at center of response to Protestantism
* "Aquinas had taught that we talk about God "analogically"
* Port Royal Jansenists &#x2013; rigorous piety and trust in grace as opposed to Jesuits whom they saw as "Pelagian"
* Pascal: genius of age &#x2026; conversion "Fire, God of Abraham &#x2026;" trust in grace while being well trained in reason as mathematician
* Pascal defense of Christianity, but ultimately Pope ruled against Jansenist radical trust in grace (not own will)
* Fenelon, "Quietism", Mme. Guyon == claiming that usual rules don't apply because of special relationship with God

#### old presentations

##### 

##### Counter-reform, Calvin

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Trent
* Ignatius
* Teresa of Avila

### 5. Ch. 14: Calvin et al

#### S21

##### Presentations

* Developing themes of Modern world
	* Individualization
	* Empirical reason, Scientific Method
	* Exploration of world of diverse cultures
	* Important Developments of the Modern period
		* Exploration of the world: growing awareness of diversity in the world
		* Importance of Americas
			* Suddenly expanded natural resources
			* distance from Europe
			* "Independence"
		* Science & technology
			* exponential growth of "knowledge"[^2]
				* [^2]: cf. Mary Pat's visuals
		* Wars becoming more and more destructive, even as hope was projected
		* End of 19th c. "everything is known, just mopping up"[^1]
			* [^1]: cf. in Joplin [Which 19th century physicist famously said that all that remained to be done in physics was compute effects to another decimal place? - Quora](:/de8d5070d1b44c9e8cbee67c42a4925a)
		* Exploitation of the earth's ecosystems
* Calvin
	* Old presentations
		* 
		* Calvinism
	* Knox and Arminius
		* Scotland corrupt church 193, thus as in France political conditions drove Calvin's followers
		* p. 194 table of **5 basic principles of Calvinist orthodoxy**
* epithoughts on Calvinism
	* "Calvinist in polity"
	* Knox and Calvin and the "reformed" tradition
	* Calvin retreating from France to Geneva
	* reading Calvin elicits not an emotional response but a cumulative one from the systematic presentation p 188
	* response to (free) grace is a **reformed** life (thus the name)
	* in contrast to Luther's distinction between law and gospel, Calvin thought we stood in the same convenant as Abraham (189)
	* "Reflections on how we come to be saved led to the doctrine of predestination (189 ff.)
	* Memoirs of confessed killer
	* theology of sacraments: cf. **Martin Bucer** (large influence)
		* sought position between Luther and Zwingli
	* questions/focus
		* "reform" as in "reformed life"
		* organizing society, community
		* what is community?
		* 39 articles
		* "Puritans"
* From Puritans to Quakers
	* cf. because of impact on US
	* Reformation in England
		* Thomas Cranmer
		* 39 articles
	* "purifying" church, worked hard and saved their money
		* Oliver Cromwell
	* Anglicans who took into account of Puritans: John Donne, William Laud, Lancelot Andrewes, Richard Hooker
		* Richard Hooker
	* Quakersth~:1000 reveal~height~:800

Pivot to a new century
======================

-   Reject the status of history
-   Christian collusion with profound sin
    1.  serfdom of women
    2.  slavery
    3.  anti-semitism

Barth
-----

-   rejection of cultural Christianity: Grace of Christ is supreme
-   everything reflects biases and cultural assumptions
-   attacked all human efforts to understand God

Anti-semitism interlude?
------------------------

-   \"God on Trial\"
-   Roots and implications
-   God on trial trailer 1:37 min <https://youtu.be/0W9uRPuo7hc>
-   complete: <https://youtu.be/tD7v9phroGM>
-   <https://youtu.be/5caAug5n8Zk>
-   cp. American experience with slavery?

Rejection of cultural Christianity
==================================

Bonhoeffer
----------

-   Cheap Grace
-   Religionless Christianity
-   trailer to pbs documentary: 1:21 <https://youtu.be/Cd_gmkypPGk>
-   <http://www.pbs.org/bonhoeffer/>

Bultmann & Existentialism
-------------------------

-   Search for historical truth is fruitless
-   There is no \"human nature\" to find
-   p\. 257

Existentialism and Fundamentalism
=================================

Existentialism\'s impact
------------------------

Bultmann's "left-wing" followers, like the American Schubert Ogden, have
concluded that Christianity concerns only the possibility of a new way
of existing.

American response
-----------------

-   Reinhold Niebuhr: Christian realism \"Man\'s capacity for justice
    makes democracy possible; but man\'s inclination to injustice makes
    democracy necessary.\"

| God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
| The courage to change the things I can,
| And the wisdom to know the difference.

cf. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serenity_Prayer>

Christ and culture
------------------

Richard Niebuhr: Christian ethicist: *Christ and Culture*

Christ against Culture
:   For the exclusive Christian, history is the story of a rising church
    or - Christian culture and a dying pagan civilization.

Christ of Culture
:   For the cultural Christian, history is the story of the Spirit's
    encounter with nature.

Christ above Culture
:   For the synthesist, history is a period of preparation under law,
    reason, gospel, and church for an ultimate communion of the soul
    with God.

<!-- -->

Christ and Culture in Paradox
:   For the dualist, history is the time of struggle between faith and
    unbelief, a period between the giving of the promise of life and its
    fulfillment.

<!-- -->

Christ Transforming Culture
:   For the conversionist, history is the story of God's mighty deeds
    and humanity's response to them.

Evangelical & Catholic?
=======================

Evangelical
-----------

-   United States. Evangelical theology, with a renewed emphasis on the
    authority and often the literal inspiration of the Bible, also
    continues to be an important force in American theology, but it has
    generally reaffirmed the views Charles Hodge and Benjamin B.
    Warfield developed in the nineteenth century rather than producing
    new ideas.

Roman Catholic response
-----------------------

-   Rahner said that there is a fundamental mystery, a matter of
    religious faith, at the heart of all human understanding.

<!-- -->

-   Vatican 2: Pilgrim people: define "the church" not as the hierarchy
    of pope and bishops but as the whole "pielgrim people of God."

> The joys and the hopes, the griefs and the anxieties of the men of
> this age, especially those who are poor or in any way afflicted, these
> are the joys and hopes, the griefs and anxieties of the followers of
> Christ.

<http://www.cctwincities.org/document.doc?id=62>

Engagement of Religion
======================

Theology engages Philosophy --again
-----------------------------------

### Recent philosophies

### THEOLOGY AND RECENT PHILOSOPHIES

-   logical positivists demanded, "How can we design a scientific
    experiment to test whether or not God exists?

<!-- -->

-   later writings of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, they have
    recognized how many different ways language can be used
    meaningfully.
-   Language has also been a preoccupation for French philosophers like
    Jacques Derrida and François Lyotard, and theologians have recently
    used their ideas to develop a "postmodern" theology

### deconstruction

-   Two world wars, the Holocaust, and increasing globalization make
    such "modern" views impossible to hold in a postmodern world.
    Derrida advocated the need for a postmodern "deconstruction" of
    knowledge

### American response

-   United States. Evangelical theology, with a renewed emphasis on the
    authority and often the literal inspiration of the Bible, also
    continues to be an important force in American theology, but it has
    generally reaffirmed the views Charles Hodge and Benjamin B.
    Warfield developed in the nineteenth century rather than producing
    new ideas.

### Process theology

-   "process theology," has developed here under the influence of Alfred
    North Whitehead.
-   Process theology describes a God who is perfect in that he is
    perfectly related to everything, who lures actions by love rather
    than forcing them by power. "He is the poet of the world, with
    tender patience leading it by his vision of truth, beauty, and
    goodness.

Theology engages the world
--------------------------

### Theology and the world

### THEOLOGY AND THE SECULAR

-   theology engaging: sciences, biology, anthropology, arts,

<!-- -->

-   \"Big enough God\"
-   Harvey Cox at Harvard saw a need for Christianity to engagement with
    secular disciplines as a real opportunity
-   related to Bonhoeffer\'s \"religionless Christianity\"?

Theology and Freedom
--------------------

### Liberation

### LIBERATION THEOLOGY

-   That very emphasis---liberating the captives---names the most
    important field of theology in the last half-century.

<!-- -->

-   Liberation theology first drew wide attention in the United States
    in connection with "black liberation."
-   James Cone's Black Theology and Black Power, published in 1969, made
    the blacks' liberation from their white oppressors its central
    theological theme and addressed whites with warnings rather than
    pleas for help.

### Feminist criticism / liberation

-   Looking beyond that, Rosemary Radford Ruether (a prolific theologian
    committed both to feminism and to Christianity) has written, All
    theologies of liberation, whether done in a black or a feminist or a
    Third World perspective, will be abortive of the liberation they
    seek, unless they finally go beyond the ... model of the oppressor
    and the oppressed.

Theology and the Religions
--------------------------

-   "Yes, I am a syncretist. But so are you. I know that I am a
    syncretist, but you don't know you are a syncretist because you have
    hegemonic power.

<!-- -->

-   Other theologians of pluralism have been less insistent that
    multiple religions are different ways of saying the same thing. A
    Roman Catholic priest named Raimundo Pannikar, for example, born in
    Spain to a Hindu father and a Spanish mother, advocates a more
    strictly comparative approach.
