<!-- markdown-toc start - Don't edit this section. Run M-x markdown-toc-refresh-toc -->
**Table of Contents**

- [From 19th - 20th c.](#from-19th---20th-c)

    - [Existentialism and Fundamentalism](#existentialism-and-fundamentalism)
        - [Existentialism\'s impact](#existentialisms-impact)
        - [American responsen](#american-responsen)
        - [Christ and culture](#christ-and-culture)
        - [Evangelical](#evangelical)
- [Catholic development](#catholic-development)
    - [Catholic focus](#catholic-focus)
        - [Roman Catholic response](#roman-catholic-response)
- [Theology engages Philosophy (again)](#theology-engages-philosophy-again)
    - [Recent philosophies](#recent-philosophies)
        - [THEOLOGY AND RECENT PHILOSOPHIES](#theology-and-recent-philosophies)
        - [deconstruction](#deconstruction)
        - [American response](#american-response)
        - [Process theology](#process-theology)
- [Theology engages the world](#theology-engages-the-world)
    - [Theology and the world](#theology-and-the-world)
        - [THEOLOGY AND THE SECULAR](#theology-and-the-secular)
- [Theology and Freedom](#theology-and-freedom)
    - [Liberation](#liberation)
        - [LIBERATION THEOLOGY](#liberation-theology)
        - [Feminist criticism / liberation](#feminist-criticism--liberation)
        - [THEOLOGY AND THE RELIGIONS](#theology-and-the-religions)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

From 19th - 20th c.
===================

Existentialism and Fundamentalism
---------------------------------

### Existentialism\'s impact

Bultmann's "left-wing" followers, like the American Schubert Ogden, have
concluded that Christianity concerns only the possibility of a new way
of existing.

### American responsen

-   Reinhold Niebuhr: Christian realism \"Man\'s capacity for justice
    makes democracy possible; but man\'s inclination to injustice makes
    democracy necessary.\"

| God, grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change,
| The courage to change the things I can,
| And the wisdom to know the difference.

cf. <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serenity_Prayer>

### Christ and culture

Richard Niebuhr: Christian ethicist: *Christ and Culture*

Christ against Culture
:   For the exclusive Christian, history is the story of a rising church
    or - Christian culture and a dying pagan civilization.

Christ of Culture
:   For the cultural Christian, history is the story of the Spirit's
    encounter with nature.

Christ above Culture
:   For the synthesist, history is a period of preparation under law,
    reason, gospel, and church for an ultimate communion of the soul
    with God.

Christ and Culture in Paradox
:   For the dualist, history is the time of struggle between faith and
    unbelief, a period between the giving of the promise of life and its
    fulfillment.

Christ Transforming Culture
:   For the conversionist, history is the story of God's mighty deeds
    and humanity's response to them.

### Evangelical

-   United States. Evangelical theology, with a renewed emphasis on the
    authority and often the literal inspiration of the Bible, also
    continues to be an important force in American theology, but it has
    generally reaffirmed the views Charles Hodge and Benjamin B.
    Warfield developed in the nineteenth century rather than producing
    new ideas.

Catholic development
====================

Catholic focus
--------------

### Roman Catholic response

-   Rahner said that there is a fundamental mystery, a matter of
    religious faith, at the heart of all human understanding.
-   Vatican 2: Pilgrim people: define "the church" not as the hierarchy
    of pope and bishops but as the whole "pielgrim people of God."

> The joys and the hopes, the griefs and the anxieties of the men of
> this age, especially those who are poor or in any way afflicted, these
> are the joys and hopes, the griefs and anxieties of the followers of
> Christ.

<http://www.cctwincities.org/document.doc?id=62>

Theology engages Philosophy (again)
===================================

Recent philosophies
-------------------

### THEOLOGY AND RECENT PHILOSOPHIES

-   logical positivists demanded, "How can we design a scientific
    experiment to test whether or not God exists?
-   later writings of the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, they have
    recognized how many different ways language can be used
    meaningfully.
-   Language has also been a preoccupation for French philosophers like
    Jacques Derrida and François Lyotard, and theologians have recently
    used their ideas to develop a "postmodern" theology

### deconstruction

-   Two world wars, the Holocaust, and increasing globalization make
    such "modern" views impossible to hold in a postmodern world.
    Derrida advocated the need for a postmodern "deconstruction" of
    knowledge

### American response

-   United States. Evangelical theology, with a renewed emphasis on the
    authority and often the literal inspiration of the Bible, also
    continues to be an important force in American theology, but it has
    generally reaffirmed the views Charles Hodge and Benjamin B.
    Warfield developed in the nineteenth century rather than producing
    new ideas.

### Process theology

-   "process theology," has developed here under the influence of Alfred
    North Whitehead.
-   Process theology describes a God who is perfect in that he is
    perfectly related to everything, who lures actions by love rather
    than forcing them by power. "He is the poet of the world, with
    tender patience leading it by his vision of truth, beauty, and
    goodness.

Theology engages the world
==========================

Theology and the world
----------------------

### THEOLOGY AND THE SECULAR

-   theology engaging: sciences, biology, anthropology, arts,
-   \"Big enough God\"
-   Harvey Cox at Harvard saw a need for Christianity to engagement with
    secular disciplines as a real opportunity
-   related to Bonhoeffer\'s \"religionless Christianity\"?

Theology and Freedom
====================

Liberation
----------

### LIBERATION THEOLOGY

-   That very emphasis---liberating the captives---names the most
    important field of theology in the last half-century.
-   Liberation theology first drew wide attention in the United States
    in connection with "black liberation."
-   James Cone's Black Theology and Black Power, published in 1969, made
    the blacks' liberation from their white oppressors its central
    theological theme and addressed whites with warnings rather than
    pleas for help.

### Feminist criticism / liberation

-   Looking beyond that, Rosemary Radford Ruether (a prolific theologian
    committed both to feminism and to Christianity) has written, All
    theologies of liberation, whether done in a black or a feminist or a
    Third World perspective, will be abortive of the liberation they
    seek, unless they finally go beyond the ... model of the oppressor
    and the oppressed.

### THEOLOGY AND THE RELIGIONS

-   "Yes, I am a syncretist. But so are you. I know that I am a
    syncretist, but you don't know you are a syncretist because you have
    hegemonic power.
-   Other theologians of pluralism have been less insistent that
    multiple religions are different ways of saying the same thing. A
    Roman Catholic priest named Raimundo Pannikar, for example, born in
    Spain to a Hindu father and a Spanish mother, advocates a more
    strictly comparative approach.
